---
layout: post
title: Toolchain updates - Loader 0.4.5, Loom 0.2.2
ref: loader-045
---
Loader 0.4.5 is now out, with a bunch of changes! As we haven't made a post for 0.4.3 or 0.4.4, here's a changelog for all:

  * Loader 0.4.3
    * (Really) fixed Realms support!
    * Improved Mixin's Java version handling - "early access" versions, such as "13-ea" (Java 13), are now detected correctly.
    * Trying to launch a Minecraft instance with ModLoader will now automatically trigger use of the "compatibility" class loader it requires.
  * Loader 0.4.4
    * New server launching method (requires Installer 0.4.0+), with nowhere near as much complexity as the one introduced in 0.4.0
    * Fixed minor, hypothetical Mixin bug
  * Loader 0.4.5
    * Added support for injecting into static and default interface methods with Mixin
    * Fixed Mixin failures on certain non-English locales
    * Fixed Mixin not being allowed to inject anonymous classes
    * Fixed version comparisons not being parsed according to specification
    * Fixed regressions introduced in 0.4.4

For developers, there's Loom 0.2.2, which is another small step in de-kludgifying our build system. Changes include:

  * "modCompile" is now transitive. As of the latest builds of 0.2.1, the POM generated by *maven-publish* is correct as to the required dependencies - the deprecated *maven* plugin should not be used.
  * Backported the following Loom 0.3 features:
    * Improved "genSources" handling (minor performance boost, progress logging, etc.),
    * Improved mod resolution.

I've seen a lot of awesome work in the Fabric ecosystem in the past week. It's awesome! Thank you so much!