---
layout: post
title: Fabric for Minecraft 1.19.4
ref: 1194
---
Minecraft 1.19.4 is almost here, with a number of changes that impact most mods. As noted [previously](/2022/11/24/1193.html), 'minor' releases starting from 1.19.3 can include major changes, and neither mod authors nor players should assume compatibility.

As usual, we ask players to be patient, and give mod developers time to update to this new version.

Here is a list of all major modder-facing changes in this version. Note that all code references are using Yarn mappings; modders using alternative mappings may need to use different names.

## Fabric changes
Developers should use Loom 1.1 (at the time of writing) to develop for Minecraft 1.19.4. Players should install the latest stable version of Fabric Loader (currently 0.14.14) to play 1.19.4.

### New Fabric API features
Fabric API added many features since the last update blog post:

- Language files provided by mods are now loaded on the server. (Teddy Li)
- Recipe API: add custom `Ingredient`s. (Technici4n)
- Data Generation: support resource conditions in `BlockLootTableGenerator`.
- GameTest: improve structure loading to support both NBT and SNBT-based structures. (apple502j)
- Resource Conditions: add `registry_contains` condition. (Technici4n)
- Added Client Message Events (Kevin, Juuz, Sideroo)
- Other small additions to various APIs, such as Object Builder and Renderer API

### Breaking changes and deprecations
In addition to changes described below, Transfer API received two breaking changes (applicable to 1.19.4):

- Mods now need to handle `null` directions in `FluidStorage` and `ItemStorage`, which indicate full inventory without side restriction.
- `exactView` method with `transaction` parameter, deprecated for removal, is removed. Use the transactionless method instead.

In Registry Sync, `FabricRegistryBuilder` no longer requires the type class to be passed - just the registry key. The old methods were deprecated.

In Block Render Layer API, `BlockRenderLayerMap`'s useless item-related methods were deprecated for removal.

## Minecraft changes

Minecraft 1.19.4 introduces some breaking changes to major developer-facing APIs.

### Item groups
`ItemGroup` registration changed again. Callback passed to `ItemGroup.Builder#entries` now takes two arguments, instead of three. Enabled features and operator permission flag are now passed via the context object.

```diff
private static final ItemGroup ITEM_GROUP = FabricItemGroup.builder(new Identifier(MOD_ID, "test_group"))
    .icon(() -> new ItemStack(Items.DIAMOND))
-   .entries((enabledFeatures, entries, operatorEnabled) -> {
+   .entries((context, entries) -> {
       entries.add(TEST_ITEM);
    })
    .build();
```

### Damage types
With the addition of `/damage`, damage related code has been refactored.

Damage types can now be defined using a dynamic registry, with data packs. This also removed the constant `DamageSource`s. The `DamageSources` class holds several methods to get instances of `DamageSource` with or without an attacker:

```diff
- targetEntity.damage(DamageSource.MAGIC, 4.0F);
- anotherEntity.damage(DamageSource.anvil(attacker), 1.0F);
+ targetEntity.damage(world.getDamageSources().magic(), 4.0F);
+ anotherEntity.damage(world.getDamageSources().fallingAnvil(attacker), 1.0F);
```

`getDamageSources` method also exists in `Entity` as a shortcut.

To check if damage is of a certain type, tags should be used. Several data pack predicates related to damages have changed to reflect this.

Many damage related checks previously hardcoded in the game, such as fall damage-immune mobs (via `handleFallDamage` override), are now handled using entity and damage type tags.

### Block set types
Sounds of various blocks, such as doors, trapdoors, buttons, pressure plates, etc. are now configured by passing an instance of a new class, `BlockSetType`, to the respective block constructors. `BlockSetType`s can be created and registered using Object Builder API's `BlockSetTypeRegistry`.

Similarly, signs and fence gates use the class `WoodType` to determine their sounds and sign textures. `WoodType`s require a `BlockSetType`, and can be registered using `WoodTypeRegistry`.

### Biome
Biome precipitation is now a boolean. Whether it rains or snows is now entirely dependent on temperature and is positional; if the temperature is below `0.15`, it snows. Biome Modification API's `setPrecipitation` method now takes a boolean to reflect this, and `Biome#getPrecipitation` and `hasPrecipitation` methods were added to reflect this. `Biome#isHot` is removed and replaced with tags for specific usecases.

Biome JSON files should now have a boolean `has_precipitation` field, not enum `precipitation` field.

### GUIs and rendering
`RenderSystem#enableTexture` and `disableTexture` has been removed. They are no longer necessary.

Most rendering methods now take `MatrixStack` if they did not already. With this, `DrawableHelper#getZOffset` is now gone, and all `DrawableHelper` methods have turned into static methods, along with some Yarn renames:

- `drawCenteredText` -> `drawCenteredTextWithShadow`
- `drawStringWithShadow`/`drawWithShadow` -> `drawTextWithShadow`

`ModelTransformation.Mode` is replaced with `ModelTransformationMode` (notice the lack of dot). `TextRenderer` methods now take `TextLayerType`, instead of boolean `seeThrough`.

GUI code has received changes to support new keyboard navigation. After each keyboard navigation, the game recalculates the focused element; it creates a tree of elements, making sure only one element is focused at a time. `Screen` implementations should call `setInitialFocus` within the `init` method.

`ScreenHandlerType` now requires a required feature set to be passed. This is usually `FeatureFlags.VANILLA_FEATURES`.

### Recipes
Many recipe related methods now require a `DynamicRegistryManager` instance to be passed.

### Entities
`Entity#stepHeight` is now private. This must now be set using `setStepHeight`. The getter `getStepHeight` is added as well.

References to "scoreboard tag" (`/tag`) are now renamed to "command tag".

`getCausingEntity`/`setCausingEntity` and other owner-related methods have been merged into `getOwner` and `setOwner`.

Several changes have been made to vehicles. `ItemSteerable` methods are moved to `LivingEntity`, and `SaddledComponent` fields are now private. The following methods were added to `LivingEntity`:

- `tickControlled`, which is called every tick if the entity is being ridden and controlled by other entity. Set the entity rotation and call `SaddledComponent#tickBoost` here.
- `travelControlled`, from `ItemSteerable#travel`.
- `getControlledMovementSpeed`, which calculates the velocity from the user input.
- `getSaddledSpeed`, which calculates the velocity of the entity. Multiply the value with `SaddledComponent#getSpeed` and return here.

Additionally, `LivingEntity#getOffGroundSpeed` was added. This controls the entity velocity when it is falling or flying.

### Equipment
`Wearable` is renamed to `Equipment`, and is now implemented by shields. `Equipment` items must now also implement `getSlotType` method.

`ArmorItem` constructor now takes an `ArmorItem.ArmorType` instead of an `EquipmentSlot`.

### BlockPos changes
`Vec3i` and `BlockPos` constructors that take `double` or `Position` (such as `Vec3d`) are moved to `ofFloored` method. This makes it clear which rounding mode is used.

```diff
- BlockPos pos = new BlockPos(3.14, 0.0, 3.14);
- BlockPos pos2 = new BlockPos(entity.getPos());
+ BlockPos pos = BlockPos.ofFloored(3.14, 0.0, 3.14);
+ BlockPos pos2 = BlockPos.ofFloored(entity.getPos());
```

### Texts
`TranslatableTextContent` now supports text fallbacks, used when no matching translation is found. To construct texts with fallbacks, use `Text#translatableWithFallback`.

`ScreenTexts` received `CONTINUE` and `SPACE` predefined texts, as well as a `space` method for chaining; for example `space().append(text)`.

### Data fixers
The library that powers serialization codecs and world file updates, DataFixerUpper, received major performance improvements both in startup and update time.

The library update and corresponding Minecraft changes are as follows:

- `update` methods in `NbtHelper` are moved to `DataFixTypes`.
- There is now a method to update `Dynamic`s that aren't NBT.
- `getDataVersion` and `putDataVersion` methods were added to `NbtHelper`.
- `DataResult#error` now expects a `Supplier<String>`, to lazy-evaluate the error message.
- `Util#getBootstrapExecutor` is removed, because its only use was off-thread DataFixerUpper optimization (which is no longer off-thread). Use `getMainWorkerExecutor` instead.